0.1.2 Drills, exercise, etc.

Green: Advice
Programming is not just an intellectual activity, so writing programs is necessary to master programming skills. We provide two levels of programming practice:

* Drills: A drill is a very simple exercise devised to develop practical, almost mechanical skills. A drill usually consists of a sequence of modifications of a single program. You should do every drill. A drill is not asking for deep understanding, cleverness, or initiative. We consider the drills part of the basic fabric of the book. If you haven't done the drills, you have not "done" the book.

* Exercises: Some exercises are trivial and others are very hard, but most are intended to leave some scope for initiatie and imagination. If you are serious, you'll do quite a few exercises. At least do enough to kinw which are difficult for you. Then do a few more of those. That's how you'll learn the most. The exercises are meant to be manageable without execeptional cleverness, rather than to be tricky puzzles. However, we hope that we have provided exercises that are hard enough to challenge anybody and enough exercises to exhaust even the best student's available time. We do not expect you to do them all, but feel free to try.

We recommend that you take part in a small project. A project is intended to produce a complete useful program.

Some people like to put the book aside and try some examples before reading to the end of a chapter. We provide simple suggestions for practical work labeled "Try this" at natural breaks in the text. A "Try this" is generally in the nature of a drill focused narrowly on the topic that precedes it.

Review questions are intended to point you to the key ideas explained in the chapter. The review questions try to help you articulate the ideas and concepts.

The "Terms" section at the end of each chpater presents the basic vocabulary of programming and of C++.

Learning involves repetition. Our ideal is to make every important point at least twice and to reinforce it with exercises.
