Preface

"Damn the torpedoes! Full speed ahead." - Admiral Farragut

Programming is the art of expressing solutions to problem so that a computer can execute those solutions.

This book is for someone who has never programmed before but is willing to work hard to learn. How long will that take? If you work by yourself, maybe 15 hours a week for 14 weeks.

Three months may seem a long time, but there's a lot to learn and you'll be writing your first simple programs after about an hour.

All learning is gradual.

Without understanding software you are reduced to believing in "magic" and will be locked out of many of the most interesting, profitable, and socially useful technical fields of work. Like mathematics, programming - when done well - is a valuable intellectual exercise that sharpens our ability to think. However, thanks to feedback from the computer, programming is more concrete than most forms of math, and therefore accessible to more people.

Why C++? You can't learn to program without a programming language, and C++ directly supports the key concepts and techniques used in real-world software.

This is not the easiest book on beginning programming; it is not meant to be. I just aim for it to be the easiest book from which you can learn the basics of real-world programming. That's quite an ambitious goal because much modern software relies on techniques considered advanced just a few years ago.

My fundamental assumption is that you want to write programs for the use of others, and to do so responsibly, providing a decent level of system quality; that is, I assume that you want to achieve a level of professionalism.

If you desire to use the work of others without understanding how things are done and without adding significantly to the code yourself, this book is not for you.

People often underestimate the complexity of programming as well as its value.

Because of its structure an practical aims, this book can also be used as a second book on programming for someone who already knows a bit of C++ or for someone who programs in another language and wants to learn C++.

Unless your name is Stroustrup, what I discuss here is not "your father's C++."

Programming is learned by writing programs. There is no substitute for writing code.

There is more to programming - much more - than following a few rules and reading the manual. Understanding thefundamental ideals, principles, and techniques is the essence of a good programmer. Only well-designed code has a chance of becoming part of a correct, reliable, and maintainable system.

Programming is one of the fundamental topics that underlie everything in computer-related fields, and it has a natural place in a balanced course of computer science. I provide brief introductions to key concepts and techniques of algorithms, data structures, user interfaces, data processing, and software engineering.

Code can be beautiful as well as useful. This book is written to help you see that, to understand what it means for code to be beautiful, and to help you to master the principles and acquire the practical skills to create such code.

A note to students

Of the many thousands of first-year students we have taught so far using this book at Texas A&M University, about 60% had programmed before and about 40% had never seen a line of code in their lives. Most succeeded, so you can do it, too.

The book is widely used for self-study. However, whether you work your way through as part of a course or independently, try to work with others. Most people work better and learn faster when they are part of a group with a common aim. Remember: programming is (among other things) a practical skill that you need to practice to master. If you don't write code (do several exercises for each chapter), reading this book will be a pointless theoretical exercise.

Most students - especially thoughtful good students - faces times when they wonder whether their hard work is worthwhile. When (not if) this happens to you, take a break, reread this Preface, and look at Chapter 1 ("Computers, People, and Programming") and Chapter 22 ("Ideals and History"). There, I try to articulate what I find exciting about programming and why I consider it as crucial tool for making a positive contribution to the world.

You might find the weight of this book worrying, but it should reassure you that part of the reason for the heft is that I prefer to repeat an explanation or add an example rather than have you search for the one and only explanation.

And please don't be too impatient. Learning any major new and valuable skill takes time and is worth it.

A note to teachers

It is a book about how to construct working software. It is about programming (or more generally about how to develop software), and as such it goes into more detail about fewer topics than many traditional courses.